# Improved annotation with scRNA-seq and long reads

Recovering significant 10xGenomics single-cell RNA-seq signal through improved annotation with Oxford Nanopore (ONT) bulk long reads.
Applied on chick embryo neuro-epithelial progenitors at 66h of development.

GitHub repository started on 2021-04-02.


## Repository content and structure

### Repository root files

Files found at the root of the repository are of general purpose:

* `_bookdown.yml` - Configuration `YAML` file for the notebook
* `_build.log` - Log file (`stdout` and `stderr`) generated when running the analysis
* `_build.sh` - Bash script to run the analysis
* `_deploy.sh` - Bash script to deploy the analysis on GitHub
* `index.Rmd` - R Markdown file used for the setup of the analysis (load libraries, define variables, paths...)
* `README.md` - This file
* `_workflowr.yml` - [Workflowr](https://jdblischak.github.io/workflowr/index.html) configuration file

### Repository structure

* **data** - [Data](#data) used for the analyses (e.g. `BAM`, `RDS`, `tsv` files, ...)
* **docs** - Rendered analysis reports (as `html` files) and figures generated by the notebook
* **env** - Code used to create the conda environment for this study (e.g. `bash` script) and the corresponding [`YAML` file](https://medium.com/@balance1150/how-to-build-a-conda-environment-through-a-yaml-file-db185acf5d22).
* **figs** - Figures created before the notebook creation and used as input
* **rmd** - [R Markdown](#r-markdown-files) analysis files
* **src** - [Reusable code](#external-scripts) (e.g. functions)

### Data

Current input data files include:

```bash
- notebook		# javascript for bookdown output
- processed		# output data when generating the notebook
- raw		# raw data (input)
  - references
    - annotations
	  - ensembl
	  - ncbi
	  - ucsc
  - rna-seq
    - single-cell
    - long-read
```

### R Markdown files

Current notebook files include:

* `01-Impact-ref-annotation-scRNA.Rmd` - Here we explore the discrepancies between the references annotations (Ensembl and RefSeq) and their impact on common scRNA-seq analyses.
* `02-Incomplete-annotations-induce-signal-loss.Rmd` - We study here the loss in scRNA-seq signal (e.g. genes) due to significant deficiencies in the reference annotation, specially in the 3' UTRs annotations.
* `03-Approaches-to-improve-transcriptome-with-Long-Reads.Rmd` - We compare various tools dedicated to transcriptome reconstruction in bulk RNA-seq (StringTie2, scallop), a dedicated signal detection approach and broad 3' UTR extension and apply them to scRNA-seq data and ONT bulk long reads.
* `04-Impact-reannotation-scRNA.Rmd` - We assess the impact of our various reannotations on common scRNA-seq analyses.
* `05-Validation-of-novel-genes-with-scRNA.Rmd` - We evaluate the ability of our approach to identify novel genes and use scRNA-seq analyses as a filter to highlight genes of biological interest in chick embryo neuro-epithelial progenitors.
* `06-A-tool-and-pipeline-to-improve-annotation-for-scRNA.Rmd` - Description and recommendations to use our pipeline on other scRNA-seq data.
* `07-Session-info.Rmd` - Session info output.

### External scripts

Current code files include:

```bash
- analysis
- pipeline
- preprocessing
- utilities
```


## Run the code

To run the notebook and create the corresponding `html` files, you have two options:

* In **RStudio**, click the `knit` button (you may need to change the [knit directory](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown-cookbook/working-directory.html))
* In a linux **terminal**, run the script *_build.sh* with the command:

```{bash}
bash _build.sh
```

The output will be stored in the **docs** folder.
